Added debugging docs (#3446)
software-mansion/react-native-reanimated: docs/docs/guide/debugging.mdx

remote JavaScript runtime. This means that the code you are debugging actually
runs on the device itself and behaves the same way as it would with DevTools detached.

- [**Flipper**](https://fbflipper.com/) (Hermes debugger) is an app created by
Facebook that makes it easy to use the _Chrome DevTools_ while providing additional tools for
UI inspection and debugging.

- [**Safari DevTools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#safari-developer-tools)
is Safari's built-in feature that is only available for iOS devices running JSC. It works
very similarly to Chrome DevTools - it allows you to connect to a remote runtime
and keep code execution on device.

- [**React Developer Tools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#react-developer-tools)
are a standalone app that allows debugging UI through the inspector as well as monitoring
performance and profiling your app.

### Debugging web apps

For debugging web apps you may use the tools you prefer or any that are provided
by the browser of you choice. We did not discover any issues with debugging
apps using Reanimated on web.

### Summary

<SummaryTable />

### Chrome Debugger

<ChromeDebuggerTable />

> :::info

Reviewer: I feel like we shouldn't use info boxes for TL;DRs of these sections. Can we convert this to a regular paragraph? If you want to emphasize this summary, we can use `fontWeight: bold` or add "**Summary:**" (or similar) at the beginning.

> Works, but uses web implementations of functions and runs everything on the JS thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Works, but uses web implementations of functions and runs worklets on the JS thread.
```

:::

> Since the Chrome Debugger runs it's own web worker all the code is run on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the Chrome Debugger runs its own web worker all the code is run on
```

the JS thread and it uses the JavaScript engine provided by your web
browser (V8 in Chrome, JSC in Safari and SpiderMonkey in Firefox). This
means that this piece of code:

```js
function runWorklet() {
  'worklet';
  console.log('worklet:', _WORKLET);
}
runOnUI(runWorklet)();
```

would output:

```
LOG: worklet: false
```

Another side effect is that Reanimated uses web implementations of all
functions. This means that the `scrollTo` function will work
(using the native web implementation), but the `measure`
function will not be available and it's usage will trigger this error:

```
[reanimated.measure] method cannot be used for web or Chrome Debugger
```

> You may stil use the standard web version of measure as described

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may still use the standard web version of measure as described
```

:::

Even though Chrome DevTools supports the Hermes and V8 engines it
unfortunately doesn't recognize Reanimated's additional UI context. This
means that you won't be able to debug worklets and breakpoints set in them
will be ignored. All other features work as expected.

*We are actively working on enabling worklet debugging with Chrome DevTools on Hermes.*

### Flipper (Hermes debugger)

<FlipperTable />

:::info

Works, but only the JS context can be debugged.

:::

Even though Flipper supports the Hermes and V8 engines it
unfortunately doesn't recognize Reanimated's additional UI context. This
means that you won't be able to debug worklets and breakpoints set in them
will be ignored. All other features work as expected.

*We are actively working on enabling worklet debugging with Flipper on Hermes.*

### Safari DevTools

<SafariDevToolsTable />

:::info

Safari DevTools is only available on iOS devices running the JSC engine.

:::

After opening Safari and configuring it as specified in the React Native
docs, under `Develop > Device` you'll see two JSC contexts
like in the screenshot below:

![Screenshot showing Safari's Develop menu options](/img/debugging/SafariJSCiOS.png)

> One of them will be the main JS context. All `console.log`

Reviewer: We can mention that the order of contexts is non-deterministic.

outputs will appear in the console of this context. You can also set
breakpoints here, but unfortunately the only source file visible is the
transformed `indexjs.bundle` which does make things more
difficult to find.

The other option will be the UI context. No console logs will appear in
the console of this context, but all worklet functions should be visible
as separate files. It is also possible to set breakpoints in these
worklets.

**Caution!**

> *Remember that console logs will appear on the main thread as the

Reviewer: main thread = UI thread
```suggestion
*Remember that console logs will appear in the primary JS context as the
```

`console.log` funcion on the UI thread is just a reference to the one from

> the JS thread.*

Reviewer: This applies to all debugging tools so we can move this higher. Also, use `:::caution` to show a yellow box.

and keep code execution on device.

- [**React Developer Tools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#react-developer-tools)
are a standalone app that allows debugging UI through the inspector, as well as monitoring
performance and profiling your app.

### The JS context vs. the UI context

It is important to understand the differences between the JS and UI contexts.
One thing to note is that adding Reanimated changes nothing when it comes
to debugging the regular JS context that is available in all React Native apps.
It is only debugging the UI context, which is specific to the Reanimated
library that might be difficult to debug in some scenarios, which are all
explained in this article.

You can read more about Reanimated's architecture [here](../fundamentals/architecture).

### Debugging web apps

For debugging web apps, you may use the tools you prefer or any that are provided
by the browser of your choice. We did not discover any issues with debugging
apps using Reanimated on web.

### Summary

<SummaryTable />

:::caution

Remember that console logs will always appear in the primary JS context as the

> `console.log` function on the UI thread is just a reference to the one from
> the JS thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`console.log` function on the UI context is just a wrapper of the one from
the JS context.
```

:::

### Chrome Debugger

<ChromeDebuggerTable />

**Summary:**
Works, but uses web implementations of functions and runs everything on the JS thread.

Since the Chrome Debugger runs its own web worker, all the code is run on
the JS thread, and it uses the JavaScript engine provided by your web
browser (V8 in Chrome, JSC in Safari and SpiderMonkey in Firefox). This
means that this piece of code:

```js
function runWorklet() {
  'worklet';
  console.log('worklet:', _WORKLET);
}
runOnUI(runWorklet)();
```

would output:

```
LOG: worklet: false
```

Another side effect is that Reanimated uses web implementations of all
functions. This means that the `scrollTo` function will work
(using the native web implementation), but the `measure`
function will not be available, and its usage will trigger this error:

```

> [reanimated.measure] method cannot be used for web or Chrome Debugger

Reviewer: This error message has been improved in #3453 and will be changed again in #3598.

```

> You may still use the standard web version of measure as described

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may still use the standard web version of `measure` as described
```

this hook, the following message will appear in the logs:

```
[Reanimated] useAnimatedSensor is not available on web yet.
```

But despite all of this, it is still possible to set breakpoints both in
normal JS code and in worklets (since they run on the main JS
thread now).

### Chrome DevTools

<ChromeDevToolsTable />

**Summary:**
Works and both contexts can be debugged.

:::warning

This is an early experimental feature.

:::

Worklet debugging is now available in Reanimated apps as an early experimental
feature. We do not recommend using Chrome DevTools to debug the UI context, but
instead try using the Flipper tool. It has fewer bugs and provides a much better
experience.

If you still want to use Chrome DevTools then follow these steps:

1. Add the `patch-package` to your project and set it up to run as a `post-install` task.
More details can be found [here](https://www.npmjs.com/package/patch-package).

2. Add [this](/content/metro-inspector-proxy+0.72.1.patch) patch for `metro` and
[this](/content/react-native-gesture-handler+2.5.0.patch) one for `react-native-gesture-handler`
to the `patches/` folder. *Warnings about mismatched patch versions can

> be safely ignored if the patch was successfully applied*.

Reviewer: Split this two points into separate one for `metro-inspector-proxy` (replace version with `<0.xx.yy>`) and separate for gesture handler (add comment that you can skip this step with RNGH `>=2.7.0`).

> 3. Go to [chrome://inspect](chrome://inspect) in a Google Chrome browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open [chrome://inspect](chrome://inspect) in a Google Chrome browser.
```

4. Select the Reanimated runtime from the list. The list should look something
like this:

![Screenshot showing Chrome DevTools target selection](/img/debugging/ChromeDevToolsList.png)

> You may choose either `Reanimated Runtime` or `Reaniamted Runtime experimental

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may choose either `Reanimated Runtime` or `Reanimated Runtime experimental
```
btw is it "Runtime" or "runtime"?

(Improved Chrome Reloads)`, but we recommend the latter.

> _Debugging relies on source maps that are generated by the babel plugin, so you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Debugging relies on source maps that are generated by the Reanimated Babel plugin, so you
```

might have to run `yarn start --reset-cache` for those changes to take effect.
In case it still doesn't work after that please reinstall the app and reset metro
cache once again._

:::caution

Known issues include:

> - Reloads don't work - if a debugger is connected to the Reanimated Runtime while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reloads don't work - if a debugger is connected to the Reanimated runtime while
```

the reload is performed, the app will crash

- On iOS, a breakpoint can't be set in a line where a breakpoint was previously
set and then removed

> - On iOS, breakpoint labels are not visible

Reviewer: Is this still relevant?

Author: This was fixed in Flipper lately but the issue is still present in Chrome DevTools

> - The profiler does not work - this is an issue with Hermes and is not related
> to reanimated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The profiler doesn't work (it is not possible to stop the recording) - this is an issue with Hermes and is not related
to Reanimated
```
btw add link to the PR that fixes it

> - The console is sometimes unresponsive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The console is unresponsive if no animation is currently running (this will be fixed in near future)
```

> These issues **do not** affect release builds and debug builds, where the debugger connection
> is closed while performing a reload or the debugger is not used at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These issues **do not** affect release builds as well as debug builds where the debugger connection
is closed while performing a reload or the debugger is not used at all.
```

:::

*We are actively working on improving the debugging experience with Chrome DevTools on Hermes.*

### Flipper (Hermes debugger)

<FlipperTable />

**Summary:**
Works and both contexts can be debugged.

:::warning

This is an early experimental feature.

:::

Worklet debugging is now available in Reanimated apps as an early experimental
feature. If you want to try it out follow these steps:

1. Add the `patch-package` to your project and set it up to run as a `post-install` task.
More details can be found [here](https://www.npmjs.com/package/patch-package);

2. Add [this](/content/metro-inspector-proxy+0.72.1.patch) patch for `metro` and
[this](/content/react-native-gesture-handler+2.5.0.patch) one for `react-native-gesture-handler`
to the `patches/` folder. *Warnings about mismatched patch versions can
be safely ignored if the patch was successfully applied*.

> 3. Install the `reanimated` plugin in flipper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Install the `reanimated` plugin in Flipper.
```

![Screenshot showing where the plugin management panel is in Flipper](/img/debugging/flipper1.png)
![Screenshot showing where the install button for plugins is](/img/debugging/flipper2.png)

4. Select the plugin from the side menu (it might be disabled) and you should
be good to go!

![Screenshot showing the plugin working](/img/debugging/flipper3.png)

> _Debugging relies on source maps that are generated by the babel plugin, so you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Debugging relies on source maps that are generated by the Reanimated Babel plugin, so you
```

might have to run `yarn start --reset-cache` for those changes to take effect.
In case it still doesn't work after that please reinstall the app and reset metro
cache once again._

:::caution

Known issues include:

- Reloads don't work - if a debugger is connected to the Reanimated Runtime while

> the reload is performed, the app will crash

Reviewer: (both on Android and iOS)

- Breakpoints might not be active after a reload even though they look as if they
were

- Android app crashes after the Flipper client is closed and will crash on startup
after that. This is a known Flipper issue ([link](https://github.com/facebook/flipper/issues/3026))
and is not related to Reanimated.

- The profiler does not work - this is an issue with Hermes and is not related

> to reanimated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Reanimated
```

> - The console is sometimes unresponsive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The console is unresponsive if there are no animations running (this will be fixed in near future)
```

> These issues **do not** affect release builds and debug builds, where the debugger connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These issues **do not** affect release builds as well as debug builds where the debugger connection
```

---
id: debugging
title: "Debugging Reanimated"
sidebar_label: "Debugging Reanimated"
---

import CompatibilityTable from './debugging_table/table';

Due to Reanimated's unique architecture and usage of a second thread debugging
can be problematic and some common solutions might not work as expected.
This article summarizes all the available methods and highlights their caveats.

:::note

Reanimated v1 works with all of the common React Native debugging tools. This

> article focuses on the use of these tools with Reaniamted v2.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be better to enable line wrapping in the editor instead?

:::

### React Native debugging tools

These are the debugging tools we checked for compatibility with React Native
apps using the Reanimated library:

- [**Chrome debugger**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#chrome-developer-tools)
(also known as _React Native Debugger_) is a simple tool that creates a web

> worker inside your preferred browser which executes your app's code. It works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
worker inside your preferred browser which executes your app's JavaScript code. It works
```

with all the runtimes available in React Native.

- [**Chrome DevTools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/hermes#debugging-js-on-hermes-using-google-chromes-devtools)

> (unavailable for JSC) are Chrome's built-in feature that allow for connecting to a
> remote JavaScript runtime. This means that the code you are debugging actually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(unavailable for JSC) is Chrome's built-in feature that allows for connecting to a
remote JavaScript runtime. This means that the code you are debugging actually
```
source: https://support.google.com/adsense/answer/10858959?hl=en

runs on the device itself and behaves the same way as it would with DevTools detached.

- [**Flipper**](https://fbflipper.com/) (Hermes debugger) is an app created by
Facebook that makes it easy to use _Chrome DevTools_ while providing additional tools for
UI inspection and debugging.

- [**Safari DevTools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#safari-developer-tools)

> are Safari's built-in feature and are available for iOS devices running JSC only. They work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is Safari's built-in feature and are available for iOS devices running JSC only. They work
```

very similarly to Chrome DevTools - they allow you to connect to a remote runtime
and keep code execution on device.

> - [**React DevTools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#react-developer-tools)

Reviewer: The official name seems to be "React Developer Tools" (source: https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/react-developer-tools/fmkadmapgofadopljbjfkapdkoienihi). Can we rename this everywhere to avoid confusion and improve searchability?

> - [**React DevTools**](https://reactnative.dev/docs/debugging#react-developer-tools)

Reviewer: The official name seems to be "React Developer Tools".

are a tool that allows debugging UI through the inspector as well as monitoring
performance and profiling your app.

### Debugging web apps

For debugging web apps you may use the tools you prefer or any that are provided
by the browser of you choice. We did not discover any issues with debugging
apps using Reanimated on web.

### Debugging mobile apps

<!-- 
  Testing setup:
    - Shared:
      - react-native: 0.69.3
      - empty app generated using the typescript template
      - added reanimated only
      - tested: scrollTo, measure, useAnimatedSensor, console logs with _WORKLET
    - Android:
      - Device: Pixel 5 API 32
    - iOS:
      - Device: iPhone 13 Pro (iOS 15.5)
-->

> <CompatibilityTable/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<CompatibilityTable />
```
Can we also configure linter for this file?
